<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>The object of this book is to trace some strands in the development of religious thought on social and economic questions in the period which saw the transition from medieval to modern theories of social organization. It does not carry the subject beyond the beginning of the eighteenth century, and it makes no pretense of dealing with the history either of economic theory or of economic practice, except in so far as theory and practice were related to changes in religious opinion. In reality, however, the connection between them was intimate and vital. The revolutions, at once religious, political and social, which herald the transition from the medieval to the modern world, were hardly less decisive for the economic character of the new civilization than for its ecclesiastical organization and religious doctrines. The economic categories of modern society have their roots in the economic expansion and social convulsions which accompanied the age of the Renaissance and the Reformation.</p>
			<p>The history of religious thought on questions of social ethics is a topic which has been treated in England by the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cunningham, by Sir William Ashley, whose essay on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Canonist Doctrine</i> first interested me in the subject, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. G.</abbr> Coulton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. G.</abbr> Wood, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> O’Brien. But it is no reflection on their work to say that the most important contributions of recent years have come from continental students, in particular Troeltsch, Choisy, Sombart, Brentano, Levy and, above all, Max Weber, whose celebrated essay on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Die Protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus</i> gave a new turn to the discussion. No one can work, on however humble a scale, in the same field, without being conscious of the heavy obligation under which these scholars have laid him. While I have not always been able to accept their conclusions, I am glad to have this opportunity of expressing my indebtedness to them. I regret that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coulton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Medieval Village</i> appeared too late for me to make use of its abundant stores of learning and insight.</p>
			<p>It only remains for me to thank the friends whose assistance has enabled me to make this book somewhat less imperfect than it would otherwise have been. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Hammond, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Power, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. P.</abbr> Wadsworth have been kind enough to read, and to improve, the manuscript. Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Neale, in addition to reading the proofs, has helped me most generously throughout with advice and criticism. I am deeply indebted both to Miss Bulkley, who has undertaken the thankless task of correcting the proofs and making an index, and to the London School of Economics and the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Fund for enabling me to make use of her services. My obligation to the help given by my wife is beyond acknowledgment.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Tawney.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
